BOOK FOUR 135

and their power to be born is blunted. And he fecundates, that is!
makes fertile, the world in the spring when the earth's buds come
forth: he impregnates the earth like a husband inseminating his
wife. And he causes the elements to alternate by turns when he
smelts and matures what has come into being in Vulcan‘s smithy,
when he dries what is mature under the breasts of Juno' when he
castrates Saturn during the turbulence of winter.‚ Thus a sober
hidden sense often reconciles the superficial irregularity of a state-
ment with the comfort of a conscience in harmony with itself.

[18.] I imagine that like an indiscreet mocker you would deride
what the same author elegantly asserts. He claims that his newly
bearded cheeks would not allow Cillenius to go about half-naked,
wearing a tiny cape as a hood' with everything else uncovered
except for the clouded peak of his shoulders, without a great guf-
faw from the laughing Cyprian. 1 guess you would find it hard to
refrain from a hasty objection that at first glance it does not seem
suitable to say “peak of his shouldersl‘ especially since “peak''
seems suitable only to the summit of a mountain or other lofty
places. You will also judge that cheeks cannot be said to alloW,
endure, or withstand, or a cape be said to cloud over. But under the
rough and jarring surface of language, or under the crude rough-
ness of the verbal bark, frequently hides an inner sweetness to be
laboriously uncovered by the removal of the coarse bark. Certainly
by “peak of his shoulders'' he means nothing other than the tops of
the shoulders, which are easy to locate on the human body.

[19.] But I cannot believe that you are so obstinate or in such
haste to condemn what others say or write, or that you are so
ignorant about Mercury's office and the dignity of his function. On
the contrary, you know Cillenius is the lord of eloquence, always
busy as investigator of the gods, and skilled in his line of work.
That he is half-naked and clad like a soldier or wrestler, or just
scurrilously. in a small cape, which seems so absurd on the surface'
becomes an allusion to the swiftness of speech. Hence, the hairiness
of the adolescent Mercury's cheeks and uncovered buttocks excited
the laughter of Venus as she watched him arrive so frostily and
scantily clad. Martianus clearly leaves us to understand that a
naked man (that is! one devoid of wisdom)' although he be elo-

